docs: add concepts and defs to README.md (#680)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension: README.md

# Gateway API Inference Extension (GIE)

This project offers tools for AI Inference, enabling developers to build [Inference Gateways].

[Inference Gateways]:#concepts-and-definitions

## Concepts and Definitions

AI/ML is changing rapidly, and [Inference] goes beyond basic networking to include complex traffic routing and optimizations. Below are key terms used within this project:

> - **Scheduler**: Makes decisions about which endpoint is optimal (best cost / best performance) for an inference request based on `Metrics and Capabilities` from Model Serving Platforms.

Author: :+1: 

```suggestion
- **Scheduler**: Makes decisions about which endpoint is optimal (best cost / best performance) for an inference request based on `Metrics and Capabilities` from [Model Serving](/docs/proposals/003-model-server-protocol/README.md).
```

- **Metrics and Capabilities**: Data provided by model serving platforms about performance, availability and capabilities to optimize routing. Includes things like [Prefix Cache] status or [LoRA Adapters] availability.

> - **Endpoint Picker**: A `Scheduler` combined with `Metrics and Capabilities` systems is often referred to together as an `Endpoint Picker (EPP)`.

Author: Sure, let's use ESE and we'll allude to the EPP language as related:

```suggestion
- **Endpoint Selector**: A `Scheduler` combined with `Metrics and Capabilities` systems is often referred to together as an [Endpoint Selection Extension](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/#endpoint-selection-extension) (this is also sometimes referred to as an "endpoint picker").
```

> - **Endpoint Picker**: A `Scheduler` combined with `Metrics and Capabilities` systems is often referred to together as an `Endpoint Picker (EPP)`.

Reviewer: EPP has been a fairly canonical term at this point IMO. Open to other opinions.

> - **Endpoint Picker**: A `Scheduler` combined with `Metrics and Capabilities` systems is often referred to together as an `Endpoint Picker (EPP)`.

Author: Dudes.

# Gateway API Inference Extension (GIE)

This project offers tools for [AI Inference], enabling developers to build [Inference Gateways].

[AI Inference]:https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/llm-inference-optimization
[Inference Gateways]:#concepts-and-definitions

## Concepts and Definitions

AI/ML is changing rapidly, and [Inference] goes beyond basic networking to include complex traffic routing and optimizations. Below are key terms for developers:

> - **Scheduler**: Makes decisions about which endpoint is optimal (best cost / best performance) for an inference request based on `Metrics and Capabilities` from [Model Serving Platforms].

Reviewer 2: We have been using the term "endpoint picker" in pkg and image names in this repo. I think we need to somehow introduce it here. For example 

Perhaps:

```suggestion
- **Scheduler**: Makes decisions about which endpoint is optimal (best cost / best performance) for an inference request based on `Metrics and Capabilities` from [Model Serving Platforms]. We refer to this scheduler as the [`Endpoint Picker`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/tree/main/pkg/epp).
```

Reviewer 2: I guess EPP as it is right now is the full extension that implements both the scheduler and the metrics+capabilities components, not just the scheduler. Perhaps we add it as a separate definition after the definitions of scheduler and metrics+capabilities.

Author: Sounds good, I added it as a new line, LMKWYT?

- **Metrics and Capabilities**: Data provided by model serving platforms about performance, availability and capabilities to optimize routing. Includes things like [Prefix Cache] status or [LoRA Adapters] availability.

> - **AI Gateway**: A proxy/load-balancer which has been coupled with a `Scheduler` to ensure optimized routing decisions for inference requests.

Reviewer 2: Per the discussion in the technical overview, this is the definition of an "Inference Gateway", not an "AI Gateway."

# Gateway API Inference Extension (GIE)

This project offers tools for [AI Inference], enabling developers to build [Inference Gateways].

> [AI Inference]:https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/llm-inference-optimization
> [Inference Gateways]:#concepts-and-definitions

Author: That one was originally suggested by @ahg-g. However I'll just remove the link to avoid the dilemma.

```suggestion
[Inference Gateways]:#concepts-and-definitions
```

## Concepts and Definitions

> AI/ML is changing rapidly, and [Inference] goes beyond basic networking to include complex traffic routing and optimizations. Below are key terms for developers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
AI/ML is changing rapidly, and [Inference] goes beyond basic networking to include complex traffic routing and optimizations. Below are key terms used within this project:
```
This isn't a hard suggestion, just trying out different wording, reject if it doesn't feel right.

- **Scheduler**: Makes decisions about which endpoint is optimal (best cost / best performance) for an inference request based on `Metrics and Capabilities` from [Model Serving Platforms].
- **Metrics and Capabilities**: Data provided by model serving platforms about performance, availability and capabilities to optimize routing. Includes things like [Prefix Cache] status or [LoRA Adapters] availability.
- **Endpoint Picker**: A `Scheduler` combined with `Metrics and Capabilities` systems is often referred to together as an `Endpoint Picker (EPP)`.

> - **Inference Gateway**: A proxy/load-balancer which has been coupled with a `Endpoint Picker` to ensure optimized routing decisions for inference requests.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Inference Gateway**: A proxy/load-balancer which has been coupled with a `Endpoint Picker`. It provides optimized routing and load balancing for serving generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) workloads. It simplifies the deployment, management, and observability of AI inference workloads.
```

For deeper insights and more advanced concepts, refer to our [proposals](/docs/proposals).

[Inference]:https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/llm-inference-optimization
[Gateway API]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api

> [Model Serving Platforms]:https://ubuntu.com/blog/guide-to-ml-model-serving

Reviewer 4: I'm not a fan of this blog post as it highlights other projects and paid training.

Author: ```suggestion
```

# Gateway API Inference Extension

This project offers tools for [AI Inference], enabling developers to build [AI Gateways and Inference Frameworks].

> [AI Inference]:https://research.ibm.com/blog/AI-inference-explained

Reviewer 2: I feel the digital ocean blog on llm inference and optimizations is more relevant: https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/llm-inference-optimization

Author: Sure thing :+1: 

```suggestion
[AI Inference]:https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/llm-inference-optimization
```

[AI Gateways and Inference Frameworks]:#concepts-and-definitions

## Concepts and Definitions

AI/ML is evolving rapidly, and [Inference] goes beyond basic networking to include complex traffic routing and optimizations. Below are key terms for developers:

- **GIE**: Short for "Gateway API Inference Extension".

> - **Scheduler**: Manages routing in inference, basing decisions on routing rules (e.g., "model name") and `Metrics and Capabilities` from [Model Serving Platforms].

Reviewer 2: The scheduler currently doesn't make "request routing" decisions based on the model name, the current implementation assumes that the pool supports a single base model, and all servers within the pool can serve any of the defined adapters on the pool.

Author: :+1: 

```suggestion
- **Scheduler**: Manages routing in inference, basing decisions on routing rules and `Metrics and Capabilities` from [Model Serving Platforms].
```

- **Metrics and Capabilities**: Data provided by model serving platforms about performance, availability and capabilities to optimize routing. Includes things like [Prefix Cache] status or [LoRA Adapters] availability.

> - **Inference Framework**: The combination of a `Scheduler`, its associated `Metrics and Capabilities`, and an `AI Gateway` is considered an `Inference Framework`.

Reviewer 2: I am a little confused by this concept for a couple of reasons:

1) I think "Inference Framework" is a very broad term that I would expect to include components other than the inference gateway (model servers for example), which is not what I assume the intention here.

2) My read is that this is defining a parallel concept to "Inference Gateway", which the next section already defines as a Proxy (or k8s gateway) + Inference Extension, with the "Inference Extension" being the component that encapsulates scheduling, load and status probing of model servers.

Author: Ok, let me pull it out for now and we'll think through it some more.

```suggestion
```

> - **AI Gateway**: A proxy/load-balancer routing inference traffic. While it is part of an `Inference Framework`, an `AI Gateway` may also operate independently.

Reviewer 2: This definition blurs the line between inference gateway and ai gateway as defined by the next section. I think we need to clearly distinguish between the two concepts.

Author: Ok, let's pull back for now and we'll think through it some more.

```suggestion
```

Author: Tried a different wording, LMKWYT? :thinking:
